\documentclass{l4proj}
\usepackage{blindtext}
\usepackage[backend=biber, sorting=nyt, style=apa]{biblatex}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\addbibresource{dissertation.bib}

\providecommand{\tightlist}{%
  \setlength{\itemsep}{0pt}\setlength{\parskip}{0pt}}

\title{A Deep Learning Approach to Musical Effects}
\author{Kieran McCool}

\begin{document}

\pagenumbering{arabic}
\maketitle

\tableofcontents
\chapter{Introduction}\label{introduction}

\section{Musical Effects}\label{musical-effects}

Musical effects are transformations which can be applied to an audio
track to change the sound in some way. These can take the form of simple
tweaks to the frequency range of the track to applying pitch modulation
and beyond.

Musical effects can completely change the way a track sounds and the art
of mixing a track is - in many ways - more complicated than the
composition and performance of the track. Sound engineers have a huge
range of choices and responsibility when it comes to getting the
soundscape correct for the final product.

The music industry is one of the few domains which is still to fully
embrace digital technology. Many recording studios and musicians still
make use of analogue equipment such as tape, vinyl, and vacuum tubes. As
these technologies become more outdated and niche, the cost of
maintaining and replacing equipment rises. As such, it is essential that
software modelling catches up to the performance and quality of these
older technologies.

\section{Musical Effect Modelling}\label{musical-effect-modelling}

The main standard for producing digital effects for use with audio is
through the Virtual Studio Technology (VST) protocol. This protocol
defines a standardised definition for how a VST host would behave,
allowing VST Plugins to be created which manipulate or use the audio
track in some way.

The technology itself is fairly flexible and allows everything from
audio visualisation tools to CPU intensive transformations to be
applied. These effects can also be stacked and ordered easily and
intuitively.

Most effects however, are limited to digital signal processing (DSP)
based transformations, the likes of which are unable to replicate the
non-linearity of many analogue methods. This is cause for concern in the
music industry and is the reason many professionals and hobbyists claim
that they are inadequate for anything more than practice and
experimentation.

\section{Machine Learning}\label{machine-learning}

In recent years, a huge amount of research has gone into machine
learning. Its application frequently makes news for revolutionising the
various industries it is applied to. As such, it would be interesting to
see the effectiveness of machine learning in this field.

Of particular interest to us were convolutional neural networks and
Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM) networks, which both seem to be at the
forefront of deep learning research. However, the application of machine
learning to audio data is in its infancy, resulting in quite a
challenging implementation with many layers to it and several
dependencies.

The idea of the project is to create two audio tracks, one which is a
clean signal from an instrument and one which is the result of applying
a VST effect to that clean track. We would then create a neural network
which would take samples from the clean signal and be trained to produce
the value of the corresponding sample in the processed track.

\chapter{Background}\label{background}

\section{Nebula VST}\label{nebula-vst}

Nebula yields the best results current modelling technologies can
achieve. It achieves this using Volterra Kernel Modelling to better
represent non-linear behaviours and exhibiting some level of memory
capacity. This allows it to model time-based effects and non-linearity
more effectively than primitive DSP approaches.

In doing this, it has become one of the most praised pieces of modelling
software, criticised only for its system requirements and its steep
learning curve. Requiring a minimum of 8GB of RAM with a recommended
amount of 16-128GB, it is a rather demanding piece of software.

Given that Nebula is the best plugin available at this time, for this
project to be considered a success, it should be as good as or better
than Nebula.

\section{Project Magenta}\label{project-magenta}

Project Magenta is a venture by the Google Brain Team, their goal is to
explore the use of machine learning in creating art, with a particular
interest in music. Most of their research is in audio synthesis with
some ventures into genre classification and similar problems.

However, this project does raise some interesting questions about the
ability of deep learning to characterise the complexities of music.

Most of their work however, was limited to interacting with MIDI data
rather than with raw audio samples, perhaps limiting the complexity of
the problem, making it an unfair comparison in terms of complexity to
effect modelling.

\section{WaveNet}\label{wavenet}

Another use of deep learning for audio synthesis is in the field of
generating realistic text-to-speech. DeepMind's WaveNet is a generative
network, trained using raw audio samples to predict the value of the
next sample in the series.

The project found that while generally an LSTM is better suited to this
kind of time-series problem, they could achieve similar results using
stacked convolutional layers applying dilated casual convolutions. At
each layer they would double the dilation amount up to a maximum before
starting again at 1. This a increases the receptive field of the network
in a similar way to how an LSTM selectively remembers traits while
maintaining the ease of training of a convolutional network.

Another way in which the WaveNet implementation differs from a standard
convolutional network is in its output layer. Instead of predicting a
sample as a floating point value representing the amplitude, the output
is a one-hot encoded vector where the largest index corresponds with the
\(\mu\)--Law encoded integer of the sample.

\begin{center}

    $F(x) = sgn(x)\frac{ln(1+\mu|x|)}{ln(1+\mu)} -1 <= x <= 1$

    $\mu$ Law as expressed in \LARGE{SOURCE THIS}
\end{center}

This network has proven itself to be capable of generating extremely
effective, almost human sounding text-to-speech and is far easier to
train than a standard LSTM-based approach.

\chapter{Aims}\label{aims}

\section{Effect Choices}\label{effect-choices}

The aim of this project is to explore the viability and success of deep
learning in effect modelling at a fairly general level. As such, a
multitude of different effects should be tested.

While there is a huge range of commonly used effects, and an even larger
range of different variations of these same effects with subtly
different responses, most of them fit in to one of three groups.

\begin{center}
\begin{tabular}{ |c|c|c| } 
 \hline
    \textbf{Amplitude Based} & \textbf{Frequency Based} & \textbf{Time Based} \\ 
 \hline
 Distortion & High/Low Pass Filter & Chorus \\ 
 Fuzz & Pitch Shift/Octave & Delay \\ 
 Compression & & Reverb \\ 
 Amplifier/Cab Simulation & & \\ 
 \hline
\end{tabular}
\end{center}

Narrowing the scope of the project to include only these effects results
in a good indication of viability across a multitude of effects, while
keeping the project scope at an attainable level.

\section{Deep Learning}\label{deep-learning}

Deep learning has demonstrated extreme potential in the realm of
text-to-speech and audio generation. As such, it is possible that it
would prove similarly effective in effect modelling.

A few different types of deep learning were of particular interest. With
regards to amplitude based effects, most of the transformation is
carried out across a narrow time-frame, and non-linearity is limited. As
such, for these effects it was hypothesised that a simple Convolutional
Net with a window of narrow window of samples as the input would be
sufficient. The same was thought for the frequency based effects such as
filters.

For Time Based effects however, the active window of the effect can be
much larger, with reverb sometimes being used with multiple second long
tail. Given that music is generally sampled at 44,100Hz, this means that
for the network to model this, it would require more than 44,100 samples
as its input vector. This is obviously impractical as the memory
requirements and time to train the network would be impractical.

In order to try and work around this, LSTM networks would be explored as
a potential remedy. These would be able to learn which aspects of the
track need to be remembered to best replicate the effect.

\chapter{Methods}\label{methods}

\section{Network Architecture}\label{network-architecture}

\subsection{Convolutional Networks}\label{convolutional-networks}

Apart from WaveNet, guidance for creating a network architecture
suitable for capturing the complexities of audio data were hard to come
by. Most of the experience I had with machine learning was limited to
completing example problems and tutorials.

As such, the first goal was to adapt one of these example networks to
receive audio data rather than text or image data which the tutorial
used. The network I chose to adapt was one which performed well on the
MNIST image classification dataset.

This network consisted of 2 Convolutional Layers with Rectified Linear
Unit (ReLU) activation layers between, the results of which were then
forwarded into a Max Pooling layer before a series of fully connected
layers. A simplified diagram of this is shown in Figure \ref{fig:nn}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[height=6.00000in]{images/cnn.png}
\caption{A Simplified Diagram of the Convolutional Network
used\label{fig:nn}}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Long-Short Term Networks}\label{long-short-term-networks}

It was thought that while a convolutional network would be impractical
in learning the spatial elements required to reproduce a time-based
effect such as reverb or chorus. Some kind of recursive neural network
(RNN) was hypothesised to be able to replicate this behaviour as it
would take the samples from the track in one at a time and learn what
properties to remember and for how long.

The downside to this was that training time is much slower as the
network has a great deal more properties to learn than a typical
feed-forward network.

\subsection{WaveNet}\label{wavenet-1}

Another idea was to implement the same basic network as WaveNet. Using
dilated casual convolutions to classify the predicted value based on a
one-hot encoded vector. This worked extremely well for generating speech
data, exhibiting a ``subjective naturalness never before seen.''

\section{Evaluating Success}\label{evaluating-success}

\subsection{Melspectograms}\label{melspectograms}

Spectograms are a graphical representation of an audio signal. They show
detailed information about the frequencies present in a signal over
time. The resulting representation is often used in speech recognition
problems as a means of feature extraction. Allowing the system to
identify the words spoken. As such, they can be used as a quantitative
means of evaluating how closely the network output matches the VST
output.

The process for creating Melspectograms is based on mapping the signal
to Mel Scale using the Fourier Transform. This can then be represented
as a heatmap of frequencies in Hz which are present in the audio. Figure
\ref{fig:spectogram} shows an example of this on an audio track.

This is a vital tool in determining how effectively frequency based
effects are being modelled as it shows any changes to the EQ of the
track. For a model to be considered successful, the spectogram from the
model should look more similar to the spectogram of the VST than the
clean signal. This demonstrates that the EQ profile of the model output
is exhibiting the same changes that the VST made.

\subsection{Impulse Response}\label{impulse-response}

Impulse responses are used to represent distinct audible events. They
can be visualised by simple graphing the amplitudes over time of a
sample. This generates a line showing the intensity of the signal over a
given time period.

Impulse responses can be useful in identifying the perceived volume or
gain applied to a signal, making it a vital tool in determining how well
the network is modelling distortion and other amplitude based effects.

Figure \ref{fig:impulse} shows an example of an impulse response graph.

In the interest of ease of comparison, in the results section the
impulse response of the clean signal, the VST signal, and the model's
effort will be plotted in on the same graph for comparison (as shown in
figure \ref{fig:axisshare}). This allows the three signals to be
compared easily. For the model to be considered successful, its curve
should be more similar to that of the VST effect than the Clean signal.
This would mean that any changes to amplitude the VST makes, the model
is attempting to capture with some degree of success.

\subsection{ABX Testing}\label{abx-testing}

ABX testing takes the form of having 3 tracks, A which is our clean
signal, B which is our processed effect, and X which is the output of
the network. The listener is not informed which track is which and has
to say whether X sounds more like A or B.

For our project to be considered successful, the results would show
extreme bias in X sounding more like B than A. As this means that the
network is producing tracks which sound more like the processed effect
than the clean input.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=6.00000in,height=2.40000in]{images/spect.png}
\caption{A Melspectogram of a guitar recording\label{fig:spectogram}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=6.00000in,height=4.50000in]{images/impulse.png}
\caption{An Impulse Response Graph of 300 samples in a
track\label{fig:impulse}}
\end{figure}

\chapter{Implementation}\label{implementation}

\section{Generating Test Data}\label{generating-test-data}

In any deep learning scenario, one of the most important factors in
success is in having a large and varied dataset for training. As such,
for this project, it was decided that we would generate random audio
data as needed, giving a theoretically infinite amount of training data.

While random data ensures a significantly large dataset, the number of
parameters which could be randomised was limited. In case this resulted
in overfitting, it was also decided to supplement the randomised data
with real music.

\subsection{Random Audio Signals}\label{random-audio-signals}

The random audio data was generated using the \texttt{scipy.signal}
module. The function \texttt{chirp} was used to generate an audio signal
which rises or falls in pitch from one frequency to another. The
frequencies are both randomised from the range of 80Hz to 1200Hz as this
is roughly the frequency range of an electric guitar. The speed at which
this frequency sweep occurs is also randomised. Frequency sweeping was
thought to imitate a guitar string being bent or slid from one note to
another.

Numpy was also used to generate sine waves at fixed frequencies from the
above range. This would simulate a single sustained note from a guitar
or other instrument.

To further add variety, scipy's \texttt{square} and \texttt{sawtooth}
functions were used with random frequencies to further add to the
variety of different sounds that can appear in the resulting audio
tracks.

Beyond this, the generated data is split into `segments' which was done
to replicate the way that music can vary in terms of speed, intensity
and general level of complexity. Each segment is 10 seconds long.

This means that every 10 seconds of audio data generated varies in terms
of how many different notes or waveforms are being expressed at a given
time, and how big the gaps between notes are. This was introduced to
replicate the fact that there is rarely just a signal note playing in a
musical piece. This could be important for modelling the time-based
effects as it adds a greater variety to the audio which may need to be
remembered to successfully model chorus, delay and reverb.

Generating the audio was carried out in a Python script called
\texttt{generate.py} which two integer arguments, the first determines
how many audio tracks are to be generated and the second determines the
number of segments per track.

\subsection{Applying VSTs to Tracks}\label{applying-vsts-to-tracks}

To train the network, we need a clean signal which takes the form of the
output from \texttt{generate.py}, we then also need files which
represent that track after it has been processed by an effect.

In order to achieve this, a VST host which could be invoked through the
command line was preferred. Initially a command line utility known as
MrsWatson was selected for this. It could be invoked with a command such
as
\texttt{mrswatson\ -\/-input\ mysong.wav\ -\/-output\ out.wav\ -\/-plugin\ myplugin}
to apply an effect called \texttt{myplugin} to \texttt{mysong.wav}.

However, MrsWatson proved to behave inconsistently. Using it with Linux
required the plugins to have been specifically compiled for Linux and
since there are so few audio professionals working on this platform the
number of effects available were seriously limited. Beyond this, the
quality of the output was poor, often exhibiting hiss or other signal
noise being introduced.

As such, a new solution was required. This came in the form of Reaper. A
fully-featured Digital Audio Workstation. While Reaper has a huge range
of features, the feature of interest in this project is its batch mode
which can be invoked with the command line. This mode allows a list of
files to be given in a line-delimited file and a Reaper signal chain
file to be given to be applied to each of these files.

A \texttt{bash} script was created to automatically generate the files
using \texttt{generate.py}, the dataset would be saved in a folder
called `dataset' The script would then run Reapers batch mode on the
files putting the resulting files in `dataset/processed' with the same
file name as their corresponding source files.

\subsection{Supplementing Dataset with Real
Music}\label{supplementing-dataset-with-real-music}

The script was later adapted to incorporate any audio files placed in
the `training\_audio' folder into this process. Allowing users to easily
supplement the random training data with real music. This could
potentially solve issues with overfitting and make it easier for the
network to learn more subtle effect features.

\section{Deep Learning Framework}\label{deep-learning-framework}

After considering the various options for machine learning in Python,
the framework of choice was PyTorch. PyTorch facilitates a tight
integration between the Python code which defines the network
architecture and the C/C++ code which runs the neural network defined in
the Python code. Using a framework like Caffe or TensorFlow, the state
of the network is hidden from the Python runtime as it exists as a
separate process. PyTorch works around this with only a small impact on
speed and memory efficiency.

This allows for easy debugging as the Python debugger and simple
\texttt{print} statements can be used to verify the behaviour of the
network at a given time. This alleviates the learning curve of having to
use something like TensorBoard for TensorFlow to visualise the network
state.

Beyond this, PyTorch has a very `Python-first' philosophy, allowing
Tensors to be manipulated using standard Python list slicing, it's even
possible to perform list comprehensions on them.

PyTorch has three main modules which were used in this project:

\begin{itemize}
\tightlist
\item
  The base module \texttt{torch}, which provides access to the
  \texttt{torch.Tensor} and its various subclasses.
\item
  \texttt{torch.nn} which provides the necessary implementations of
  neural network layers.

  \begin{itemize}
  \tightlist
  \item
    Also provides \texttt{nn.Sequential}, which can be used to stack
    various layers into one class for ease of use and to eliminate the
    boilerplate code which often is required of other frameworks.
  \end{itemize}
\item
  \texttt{torch.Autograd} which provides the \texttt{Variable} class,
  this encapsulates a \texttt{Tensor} and allows it to be used with
  backward propagation for Deep Learning to be carried out.
\end{itemize}

\section{Visualisation}\label{visualisation}

\subsection{Melspectogram}\label{melspectogram}

This was achieved using MatPlotLib and LibRosa. LibRosa has a range of
functions for visualising audio data, including the function
\texttt{melspectogram} found withing the \texttt{librosa.feature}
module. This generates a Numpy array.The \texttt{specshow} method in
\texttt{librosa.display} acts as a wrapper for
\texttt{mathplotlib.pyplot} and generates the spectogram when given the
numpy array generated by \texttt{melspectogram}

\subsection{Signal Impulse Response}\label{signal-impulse-response}

Impulse response graphs are relatively simple to implement from the data
we get from \texttt{librosa.core.load} which is used to read in audio
files. The result is an array of amplitudes over time which can simply
be plotted in a line using \texttt{matplotlib.pyplot}.

We can better compare the three audio files by plotting them the three
of them on the same axis as is shown in figure \ref{fig:axisshare}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=6.00000in,height=4.50000in]{images/axisshare.png}
\caption{Demonstrates the Clean Signal (Orange), the VST Signal (Green),
and the Model Signal (Blue). We can see the model is generating a signal
which lies somewhere between the clean signal and the VST, this shows
the model is learning the necessary
transformation.\label{fig:axisshare}}
\end{figure}

\section{Audio I/O}\label{audio-io}

The project utilises LibRosa for reading and writing \texttt{wav} files.
This was chosen as it supports a multitude of different output formats.
Early versions of the project were using \texttt{SciPy.IO.wavfile} for
this but it was limited to 64 bit output files, which was unnecessarily
large for audio data and required too much storage space.

LibRosa will output the file with the smallest sample depth required to
adequately represent the track, creating much smaller files. It is also
much more robust and can even read \texttt{MP3}, for example if users
want to include their own audio into the training data without having to
convert it to \texttt{wav}.

\chapter{Results}\label{results}

For a model to be considered successful, the Spectogram and Impulse
responses should look more similar to the VST output than the clean
signal.

\section{Amplitude Based Effects}\label{amplitude-based-effects}

\subsection{Distortion}\label{distortion}

This model was created using a Convolutional Network consisting of 6
convolutional layers, which have a ReLU activation layer between them,
before a Max Pooling Layer and a Fully Connected section which consists
of 3 Linear layers.

As demonstrated in the figures \ref{fig:distortionsc},
\ref{fig:distortionsm}, and \ref{fig:distortionsv}, the distortion unit
adds a huge amount to the intensity of all frequencies, with a bias
toward the mid ranges. This behaviour is captured fairly well by the
model. Figure \ref{fig:distortion} also demonstrates that the amplitude
boost is also learned by the model.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=6.00000in,height=4.50000in]{images/distortion.png}
\caption{Distortion after 30000 iterations over the
dataset\label{fig:distortion}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/distclean.png}
\caption{Clean Spectogram (Distorion)\label{fig:distortionsc}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/distmodel.png}
\caption{Model Spectogram (Distortion)\label{fig:distortionsm}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/distvstspect.png}
\caption{VST Spectogram (Distortion)\label{fig:distortionsv}}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Fuzz}\label{fuzz}

Fuzz seems to be modelled with similar success to distortion, which
makes sense since it belongs to the same family of effects. Figures
\ref{fig:fuzz}, \ref{fig:fuzzc}, \ref{fig:fuzzm}, and \ref{fig:fuzzv}
demonstrate that the model is able to capture the characteristics of the
fuzz effect in terms of both EQ range and amplitude.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=6.00000in,height=4.50000in]{images/fuzz.png}
\caption{Fuzz after 30000 iterations over the dataset\label{fig:fuzz}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/fuzzclean.png}
\caption{Clean Spectogram (Fuzz)\label{fig:fuzzc}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/fuzzmodel.png}
\caption{Model Spectogram (Fuzz)\label{fig:fuzzm}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/fuzzvst.png}
\caption{VST Spectogram (Fuzz)\label{fig:fuzzv}}
\end{figure}

\subsection{Amplifier + Cab Simulation}\label{amplifier-cab-simulation}

Amp Simulation is a historically difficult task. Modelling amplifiers
still have a tiny market share and are some of the most criticised
applications of software modelling. This is reflected in the fact that
the model completely fails to learn the required transformation to mimic
amp simulation.

While the spectogram (Figures \ref{fig:ampc}, \ref{fig:ampm}, and
\ref{fig:ampv}) seems to confirm that some aspects of the EQ profile are
learned, it fails to match as closely as the previous effects. Beyond
this, the VST seems to add a lot more gain, as demonstrated in
\ref{fig:ampsim}. This increased amplitude is expressed as the audio
track becoming clipped and distorted in ways that are not musical or
intentional.

This is perhaps due to the fact that there are a lot more behaviours to
learn in an amp simulation than there is with a basic distortion effect,
in fact amp simulation may even bridge the two categories of Amplitude
based effects and Frequency based effects since it operates over both of
these domains.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=6.00000in,height=4.50000in]{images/ampsim.png}
\caption{Amp Simulation after 30000 iterations over the
dataset\label{fig:ampsim}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/ampsimclean.png}
\caption{Clean Spectogram (Amp Sim)\label{fig:ampc}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/ampsimmodel.png}
\caption{Model Spectogram (Amp Sim)\label{fig:ampm}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/ampsimvst.png}
\caption{VST Spectogram (Amp Sim)\label{fig:ampv}}
\end{figure}

\section{Frequency Based Effects}\label{frequency-based-effects}

\subsection{Pitch Shifting (Octave
Shift)}\label{pitch-shifting-octave-shift}

Pitch shifting is an interesting effect, the domain of the effect is
solely in the EQ profile, unlike amp simulation which spans both
domains. As such, it is useful in confirming whether the model is
capable of learning these EQ based transformations.

Figures \ref{fig:pitchc}, \ref{fig:pitchv}, and \ref{fig:pitchm} seem to
confirm that some of this EQ based behaviour is captured and replicated.
Listening to the track also confirms this to be true. However, as shown
in \ref{fig:pitch}, the model adds a lot of additional noise to the
signal, this comes across in the track as hiss and clipping. The model
output is significantly louder than both the clean signal and the VST
processed track.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=6.00000in,height=4.50000in]{images/pitch.png}
\caption{Octave Pitch Shift after 30000 iterations over the
dataset\label{fig:pitch}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/pitchclean.png}
\caption{Clean Spectogram (Pitch Shift)\label{fig:pitchc}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/pitchmodel.png}
\caption{Model Spectogram (Pitch Shift)\label{fig:pitchm}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/pitchvst.png}
\caption{VST Spectogram (Pitch Shift)\label{fig:pitchv}}
\end{figure}

\section{Time Based Effects}\label{time-based-effects}

\subsection{Chorus}\label{chorus}

Time based effects were by far the least well performing category in the
project. Early tests with the standard convolutional network used a huge
sample size of around 5000. This was the largest input into the network
that could be achieved with 16GB of RAM. Unfortunately, this failed to
characterise the effect.

In order to combat this, an LSTM network was used instead. This took the
form of a 7 layer LSTM with a hidden size of 800. A new sampler, the
\texttt{randomSequentialSampler} was created to train for \texttt{X}
seconds of audio in order before switching to an entirely new section of
the track. This was to combat overfitting that comes from training on a
track sequentially. Sampling was completely random for other effects.
Random sampling would not have worked on the LSTM as it would have been
impossible for the network to learn what to remember if it was in random
order.

Despite this, the LSTM failed to characterise the behaviour of the VST
and in fact did not produce an audible track at all, even after 2 hours
of training. The time to train these networks is slow and even with
different numbers of layers and hidden sizes the results were the same.

From figure \ref{fig:chorus}, we can see that while there is a variation
to the signal in both the Clean and VST output, the LSTM seems to be
outputting either very similar or the same value for each sample. It is
unclear what would cause such a behaviour. This results in no audible
signal being present in the file.

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=6.00000in,height=4.50000in]{images/chorus.png}
\caption{Chorus after 30000 iterations over the
dataset\label{fig:chorus}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/chorusclean.png}
\caption{Clean Spectogram (Chorus)\label{fig:chorusc}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/chorusmodel.png}
\caption{Model Spectogram (Chorus)\label{fig:chorusm}}
\end{figure}

\begin{figure}
\centering
\includegraphics[width=4.00000in]{images/chorusvst.png}
\caption{VST Spectogram (Chorus)\label{fig:chorusv}}
\end{figure}

\subsection{A Note on Delay and
Reverb}\label{a-note-on-delay-and-reverb}

The results of these effects have been omitted from the paper due to
space constraints and the fact that they produced the exact same output
as the Chorus effect. This is potentially due to a limitation with the
LSTM network in terms of training time and system resources, a network
sophisticated enough to model these effects can not be created on my
system.

\chapter{Conclusion}\label{conclusion}

\section{Amplitude Based Effects}\label{amplitude-based-effects-1}

While the characteristics are modelled with limited success, the tracks
generated feature artifacts such has introducing additional hiss or
static noise into the signal. This prevents them from being usable as
pieces of music and as such makes it difficult to justify the project as
anything more than a proof of concept.

\section{Frequency Based Effects}\label{frequency-based-effects-1}

The network is able to learn some of the transformations to the EQ
profile of the track but the output is unconvincing at best. The audio
clips and there are clear artifacts in the signal which ruin what little
success is reached in this domain. Perhaps a more sophisticated network
would have better success in this domain, however the architecture of
which has so far been undiscovered.

\section{Time Based Effects}\label{time-based-effects-1}

The LSTM Network failed to produce audio which exhibited the qualities
of Chorus, Reverb, or Delay.This is perhaps due to the simple fact that
with audio being sampled at 44,100 samples per second, and the active
window of these effects potentially spanning more than 0.5 seconds, that
the network is simply unable to train itself on what to remember.

Perhaps the WaveNet solution would have had more success with this

\chapter{References}\label{references}
\end{document}
